Java main Method – Detailed Explanation

In Java, the main method is the starting point of program execution. When we run a Java program, the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) looks specifically for the main method. If it is not found, the program will not run.

The standard syntax of the main method is:

public static void main(String[] args)


Each word in this statement has a specific purpose.

1. Entry Point of Java Program

The main method is called the entry point because:

Program execution starts from the main method

JVM does not execute any other method before main

Without the main method, JVM does not know where to begin execution

That is why every standalone Java application must contain a main method.

2. public – Access Specifier

public means the method is accessible from anywhere.

Why public is required:

The JVM is outside the class

To allow the JVM to access and call the method, it must be public

If main is not public, the JVM cannot execute it

So, public ensures visibility to the JVM.

3. static – No Object Required

static means the method belongs to the class, not to an object.

Why static is required:

JVM starts execution without creating an object

If main were not static, JVM would first need to create an object

This would create confusion because object creation itself may need code execution

Hence, static allows the JVM to call main directly using the class name.

4. void – Return Type

void means the method does not return any value.

Why void is used:

The JVM does not expect any value back after program execution

The purpose of main is to start execution, not to return data

Therefore, the return type of main must be void.

5. main – Method Name

main is a predefined name in Java.

Why the name main:

JVM is programmed to look specifically for a method named main

Changing the name means JVM will not recognize it

So, the method name must be exactly main.

6. String[] args – Command Line Arguments

String[] args is an array of String type.

Purpose:

It is used to pass command-line arguments to the program

These arguments are supplied while running the program from the command line

Example:

java Test Hello World


Here:

args[0] = "Hello"

args[1] = "World"

The name args can be changed, but the type must be String[].

7. Fixed Method Signature

The main method has a fixed signature:

public static void main(String[] args)


Important points:

Order of keywords matters

Changing return type, access modifier, or parameter type will cause an error

JVM will not treat it as a valid starting point if the signature is altered

What Happens When You Run a Java Program?

JVM loads the .class file

JVM searches for the main method

JVM executes the statements inside main

Program ends after main finishes execution

Common Mistakes (For Exams)

Missing public

Removing static

Changing parameter type from String[]

Renaming main

Any of these will prevent the program from running.

One-Line Exam Conclusion

The main method is the entry point of a Java program, and its fixed signature allows the JVM to start execution without creating an object.