

Java Program Execution Process (Step by Step)

Step 1: Source Code
The source code is the program written by the programmer.
It is saved as a .java file, for example Party.java.
The code is written in Java language, which is readable by humans.
Its purpose is to define what the program should do.
At this stage, the computer cannot understand the program directly.

Step 2: Compiler (javac)
The Java compiler is called javac.
It converts the source code (.java file) into bytecode.
The output is a .class file, for example Party.class.
The compiler does not generate machine-specific code.
Instead, it produces platform-independent bytecode that can run on any system with a JVM.

Step 3: Bytecode (Output Code)
Bytecode is the compiled form of the Java program stored in the .class file.
It contains instructions meant for the Java Virtual Machine, not for the hardware directly.
The same bytecode works on all platforms such as Windows, Linux, and macOS.

Example of bytecode:
0 aload_0
1 invokespecial
4 return

This bytecode remains the same everywhere.

Step 4: Java Virtual Machine (JVM)
The Java Virtual Machine reads and executes the bytecode.
Each operating system or device has its own JVM implementation.
The JVM converts bytecode into machine-specific instructions.
This allows the same Java program to run on different devices like computers and mobile phones.

Key Concept: Write Once, Run Anywhere
A Java program is written once and compiled once.
The generated bytecode can run on any system that has a JVM installed.
There is no need to recompile the program for different platforms.

Summary Table

Step | Component   | Input      | Output      | Description
1    | Source Code | .java file |    —        | Programmer writes the program
2    | Compiler    | .java file | .class file | Converts source code to bytecode
3    | Bytecode    | Bytecode   |     —       | Platform-independent instructions
4    | JVM         | Bytecode   | Program runs| JVM executes the program

One-line conclusion
Java achieves platform independence using bytecode and JVM, following the principle of Write Once, Run Anywhere.

The magic of bytecode lies in the fact that Java source code is compiled into an intermediate, platform-independent form called bytecode. This bytecode can run on any system that has a Java Virtual Machine, without changing or recompiling the program. Because of bytecode and the JVM, Java achieves portability, security, and the principle of Write Once, Run Anywhere, which makes Java different from traditional programming languages.